Douglas cooling and heating serving the
Birmingham area for 38 years 988 3706
that's Douglas this is your weather
extreme video for Saturday January the
22nd I meteorologist Brian Peters Andrew
that's the cold just keeps rolling along
let's get right to this some Skycam
imagery this morning and couldn't help
but enjoy this shot at Demopolis where
we're seeing the clouds lit from behind
with the moon high in the sky there's
we're looking down the the river also
one of my favorite shots is up at chi ha
and i was checking to see if there was
any snow still up there but not in this
shot anyway and we're seeing a little
bit of color in the eastern sky and
certainly a little bit of color down at
dolphin island where by the way the
temperature this morning is a chilly 36
temperatures just plain cold across the
eastern two-thirds of the country and
boy up in Canada look at those values
those white areas minus 40s oh gosh talk
to my daughter yesterday and she went to
work with low of minus four at O'Hare in
Chicago I tell you I'm ready for spring
already on our service map we have high
pressure over the eastern part of the
country but that is still allowing some
clouds which of course helped us
overnight because the clouds came in
during the early part of the nighttime
hours and as a result our temperatures
didn't fall quite as cold as they could
have especially with the single digit
dew points that we have in the upper
atmosphere this pattern is just plain
stuck and as you're going to see in the
gfs forecast its continues to be stuck
with a long wave trough over the eastern
half of the country and because of that
we're staying a bit nippy nippy is the
word when it comes to the winners are
the watch warning map and we're seeing
all those pink areas represent some
winter weather advisories so nothing's
that tremendously bad but certainly
keeping things hopping for some folks as
they are experiencing some winter
weather at least my
winter weather qpf wise we're looking at
some rain primarily Monday and Tuesday
across the southeastern US but of course
a pretty nice bullseye up there in the
mid-atlantic states due to this low
that's moving on all right here's the
0-60 gfs model run and there goes our
surface low and notice the 540 line all
the way down into the northern Gulf of
Mexico so cold air certainly gripping
the eastern half of the country the long
wave trough position just stays anchored
over the eastern part of the country and
along with it we're seeing a number of
different impulses represented by the
little X's and the yellow areas the
vorticity centers and you can see one
out over or just south of the Four
Corners area one coming through the
mid-mississippi River Valley fortunately
for us most of those are going to be
relatively dry so the result is for
Sunday with surface high we will stay
pretty much without any precipitation
but at least some snow in the midsection
of the country again the long wave
trough position stays over the eastern
half of the country and we have a nice
little trough coming through the flow
there over Iowa and Illinois and of
course that is going to bring more cold
air our way as well as some chance for
at least a little precipitation but
right now it would appear that for
Monday the chance of rain is not that
high of around forty percent or so as
well as it's probably going to be rain
the trough comes by us on tuesday at
midday and of course you can see that
nice strong northerly fetch which keeps
things real cold and the bottom line is
that the precipitation will probably be
rain much of tuesday but as that gets
reinforced we'll probably see a
changeover to snow Tuesday night or very
early Wednesday morning but a very brief
changeover primarily because there's
just not that much moisture in the upper
atmosphere on Wednesday we stay dry but
we stay cold you can see the troughs
still over the eastern half of the
country and we certainly stay that way
on Thursday with some reinforcements you
can see a trough coming through
a little short wave coming through East
Texas and that could play some mischief
in the Gulf but it looks like it'll be a
little too far south to give any
mischief to the southeastern US that
zips along the very fast flow is we have
here on Friday so with with the fast
flow we're seeing of course another
little surface low up over the Ohio
River Valley that will give them some
precipitation and some snow and then
finally at Saturday a week from today
still you you can see the long wave
trough carved out of the eastern half of
the country and it looks like we should
be a dry with a surface high centered
over about Tupelo or so northern
Mississippi by the way I did want to
show one quick thing here this is the
model sounding for Monday afternoon
around 6pm for Birmingham and certainly
would indicate a small chance for rain
as well as the fact that the atmosphere
is just going to be too warm for
anything to occur now going out into
voodoo country the big thing i want to
show and and yes there's the GFS is
bringing some possible snow events to
the southeastern US but rather than try
to deal with any specifics like that
look at this pattern I mean first of all
the big trough remains the long wave
trough position while we get these
little short waves moving through giving
us brief disturbances and brief periods
of precipitation the long wave trough
position stays over the eastern half of
the country and then when you go out and
that's the second of februari if you go
out to the sixth of februari you can see
that there's just simply no change to
that overall pattern with this very fast
flow and short wave troughs moving
through the flow so it's the timing of
those that's going to be critical to any
kind of forecast but at least i think
the GFS probably has the right trend
here and certainly no indication that
the cold is going to be gone anytime
soon well thanks for tuning in to the
weather extreme video expect to have the
next one posted by 7 30 or eight
tomorrow morning in the meantime I hope
that you have a great saturday and
godspeed
each day there are new stories to tell
about the people who live here and the
place we call home
is is close to
we're all
sharing your stories on ABC 3340
Alabama's news leader